[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: literature do a fantastic job of illuminating and illustrating the human condition.
[Amit Varma]: So who needs philosophy?
[Amit Varma]: And hey, is that itself a philosophical question?
[Amit Varma]: If so, do we need to answer it?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: The philosopher Alfred North Whitehead once said that all of Western philosophy was nothing
[Amit Varma]: more than a series of footnotes to Plato.
[Amit Varma]: From this, you can gather two things.
[Amit Varma]: One, unlike other fields, philosophy does not seem to have made that much progress in
[Amit Varma]: the last 2000 years.
[Amit Varma]: I would argue, though, that this is not quite true.
[Amit Varma]: The second thing that quotation tells you is that Plato was a rock star.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, while reading Rebecca Goldstein's superb book, Plato at the Googleplex, Why
[Amit Varma]: Philosophy Won't Go Away, I was struck by what a foundational thinker Plato really was.
[Amit Varma]: He asked many big questions that still drive philosophical inquiry today, and he anticipated
[Amit Varma]: insights that were given proper shape many centuries later.
[Amit Varma]: For example, we think of the social contract as a concept that was formulated during the
[Amit Varma]: Enlightenment.
[Amit Varma]: And the field of game theory is something that came about in the 20th century.
[Amit Varma]: So my eyes almost popped out of my head when I read a dialogue of Plato in which Glaucon,
[Amit Varma]: elder brother of Plato and a minor character in this dialogue, describes what is basically
[Amit Varma]: a game theoretic argument for a social contract.
[Amit Varma]: And Plato's dialogues, as I discovered in Goldstein's excellent book, are full of such
[Amit Varma]: seemingly modern arguments and insights.
[Amit Varma]: Plato at the Googleplex is a book that really has two intersecting parts.
[Amit Varma]: Half the book is a series of illuminating essays on Plato, his times, his philosophy,
[Amit Varma]: the impact of his work.
[Amit Varma]: The other half is a series of fictionalized dialogues of Plato set in current times and
[Amit Varma]: modern venues like the Googleplex, and these are quite witty and entertaining.
[Amit Varma]: Besides introducing us to Plato, the book really makes an argument that philosophy is
[Amit Varma]: not an arcane academic discipline, but that it actually matters in this modern world,
[Amit Varma]: in these crazy times that we live in.
[Amit Varma]: I spoke to Goldstein in December 2018 when she was in Mumbai for the Times Lit Fest.
[Amit Varma]: We recorded in a room given to us by the organizers and the venue was quite noisy.
[Amit Varma]: So please do excuse the quality of the recording.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to it though, a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more, head on over to Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo x Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even if you want to
[Amit Varma]: buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to Indiancolors.com, that's colors with
[Amit Varma]: an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20, that's IVM for IVM podcast, IVM20
[Amit Varma]: for a 20% discount at Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Rebecca, welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Guest]: It's very, very good to be here with you and to be in conversation with you.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of intimidating to actually have a dialogue with a woman who's written Plato's
[Amit Varma]: dialogues as you have in your recent book.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to start by talking about what the philosopher Carl Jaspers calls the axial age,
[Amit Varma]: which is where you point out in your book that between 800 BC to 200 BC, there was a
[Amit Varma]: sudden explosion of different quests to find answers to the question of what makes a life
[Amit Varma]: matter.
[Amit Varma]: And it showed up in all the different normative religions, the monotheisms that sprang up
[Amit Varma]: and in philosophy in Greece.
[Amit Varma]: But my sort of question was why during this particular period was there this sudden quest?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So when I approached this question of why the ancient Greeks had this massive explosion
[Guest]: of creative ideas, you know, and they're credited with laying down the foundations of Western
[Guest]: civilization, you know what, it occurred to me that this didn't happen in a vacuum, that
[Guest]: this was happening, you know, in many places on the globe.
[Guest]: And that all of the normative paradigms, you know, meaning the paradigms that people refer
[Guest]: to when they're trying to give meaning and purpose to their lives, whether it's religious
[Guest]: or secular, were formulated during this period.
[Guest]: It was actually a philosopher, a German philosopher of the 20th century named Jaspers.
[Guest]: He was the first to notice and to name the Axial Age, that there was this great creative
[Guest]: normative ferment during this period.
[Guest]: And so the question is, you know, why did it happen then?
[Guest]: And social scientists are just beginning to look at this.
[Guest]: There hasn't been a great deal of attention given to it.
[Guest]: I mean, after all, it was one of those things that was pointed out by philosophers, that
[Guest]: something amazing was going on during this period.
[Guest]: It seems like the most important variable was that, simply, the people were well-fed.
[Guest]: Pascal Boyard in France has plotted the caloric intake all over the globe at that time.
[Guest]: And indeed, the countries that participated in what we call the Axial Age, which was India,
[Guest]: in Hinduism and Buddhism and Jainism, were formulated during this period.
[Guest]: China, Confucianism and Daoism were formulated during this period, and Greece, philosophy
[Guest]: and tragic poetry, which was their response to this, to these questions of what it is
[Guest]: that gives meaning and purpose to our lives.
[Guest]: These were all, and also the Judean hills, you know, where the Abrahamic approach was
[Guest]: formulated.
[Guest]: Persia, Zoroastrianism, all of these places that participated and forged these frameworks
[Guest]: that are still extant today, claiming all of us in one way or the other, including someone
[Guest]: like me, who's a secularist, you know, and so I trace my roots back to ancient Greece.
[Guest]: They were all well-fed.
[Amit Varma]: And what we learn from this is… Because of the shift to agriculture around
[Guest]: the 1000 BC. Exactly, exactly right.
[Guest]: And so, you know, what we learn from this is, you know, when people don't have to be
[Guest]: preoccupied 24-7 and seeing another dawn and, you know, just getting enough food in their
[Guest]: bellies, they start thinking about this question of, you know, here I am and, you know, and
[Guest]: what is it that I ought to be doing with my life, you know, and so any of these questions
[Guest]: have that word ought in them, we call normative in philosophy.
[Guest]: And it comes very naturally to our species as soon as we're freed from the, you know,
[Guest]: the constant trials of simply surviving.
[Guest]: These other features of the… You also pointed out that it correlates with
[Guest]: urbanization. Exactly.
[Guest]: These were highly organized city-states and they had standing armies, they had coinage,
[Guest]: they had slavery, they had trading, you know, this is so important, right?
[Guest]: So they were mixing with different people, different cultures, different ways of thinking,
[Guest]: which makes us humans think, well, what's the right way of thinking about our lives,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Here are these different traditions, different goals, what's the right way?
[Guest]: It comes quite naturally to us.
[Guest]: And also in these cities, there was more anonymity.
[Guest]: I had the great privilege, I don't think I wrote about it in the book because I don't
[Guest]: think I'd had yet this experience, of visiting one of the last of the hunter-gatherer tribes,
[Guest]: of spending a little time with them in Tanzania, the Hadza.
[Guest]: And it was very interesting.
[Guest]: First of all, they have to really, every day they wake up and they have to fulfill their
[Guest]: caloric needs.
[Guest]: I mean, and it's very difficult.
[Guest]: But one of the things that was very clear is they lived in great intimacy with each
[Guest]: other.
[Guest]: Everybody clearly mattered in that village, right?
[Guest]: It's sort of a, it's a family.
[Guest]: It's how, this is what we have come from, of intimate village life.
[Guest]: And when, in these big city states and there's more anonymity, this question also I think
[Guest]: is exacerbated.
[Guest]: Well, you know, who am I?
[Guest]: What can I do to achieve some sense of mattering in the universe?
[Guest]: In the village life, you matter.
[Guest]: You know, it's, everybody has their position.
[Guest]: So all of these things come together.
[Guest]: I don't think it's just a matter of caloric intake.
[Guest]: I think it's more complicated than that, but we see it in all of these places.
[Guest]: There was also a scribe class.
[Guest]: So there was written language in all, you know, there was written.
[Amit Varma]: And there was coinage, like you've pointed out in your book, so.
[Guest]: Yes, there was coinage, exactly.
[Guest]: Which is a way of also increasing the sense of sort of anonymity.
[Guest]: When there's coinage, then there's disparities of wealth, but you know, we all have this
[Guest]: existential need, even the poor among us, right, of wanting our lives to mean something.
[Guest]: They mean everything to us.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing about this Axial Age is that most, except one, most of the
[Amit Varma]: sort of normative traditions that were forming were teleological.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they were, they had a god at their center or gods or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And the only exception really was the birth of philosophy in ancient Greece.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And is it because their gods were very messed up?
[Guest]: That's what I think.
[Guest]: Their gods were really, I'm thinking of, I mean, they were, they're kind of assholes.
[Amit Varma]: Can I say that?
[Unknown]: Yeah, of course.
[Unknown]: That's what they really were, right.
[Guest]: And it was, it was extremely interesting, you know, we think of the Greeks as, you know,
[Guest]: philosophers.
[Guest]: Of course they weren't philosophers.
[Guest]: They were not a society of philosophers.
[Guest]: There's never been a society of philosophers.
[Guest]: They gave, you know, certain among them were philosophers and they gave birth to this way
[Guest]: of approaching the normative questions.
[Guest]: But we can never forget that it was the Athenian society, which is the best of the Greek city
[Guest]: states, right, that put Socrates to death.
[Guest]: I mean, there was a democracy that voted, his fellow citizens voted to put him to death.
[Guest]: So this was not a society of, they regretted it afterwards, right.
[Guest]: But after his death, we find many little statues of Socrates, they regretted it.
[Guest]: But because of certain things that had happened after they lost the Peloponnesian War, their
[Guest]: war with another city state, Sparta, they didn't have tolerance for Socrates with his
[Guest]: skeptical questions anymore, asking them or demanding that they question their own normative
[Guest]: values, which were not philosophical, but rather something that I call the ethos of
[Guest]: the extraordinary, that what they had produced was this view that in order to really matter,
[Guest]: you have to make a name for yourself so that knowledge of your life will be replicated
[Guest]: in future generations or in your contemporaries.
[Guest]: And this gives a certain moreness to your life, you know, so fame and glory, what they
[Guest]: call kleos.
[Guest]: And so that this was, this was their way of pursuing it.
[Guest]: Any way that you could be replicated in the minds of others, would make your life worth
[Guest]: living.
[Guest]: And he was attacking that, Socrates.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it very interesting how you point out that because their gods are such assholes,
[Amit Varma]: unlike other peoples elsewhere, you don't want the attention of your god, instead, you
[Amit Varma]: want to raise your own renown, like kleos, one way of translating, which I found very
[Amit Varma]: nice, acoustic renown is how you mentioned it's read more people hear of you.
[Amit Varma]: So they aspire to this ethos of the extraordinary, where they want to do extraordinary things
[Amit Varma]: so that in their own society, they are famous.
[Amit Varma]: Kleos kind of sounds like very Instagram, Twitter, kind of.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And it's interesting because, you know, in some sense, we are post-theistic society,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And the more educated we are, the more we don't think of our lives in terms of theism.
[Guest]: But what we seem to have gone back to follow the default is the pre philosophical Athenian
[Guest]: of you, which is to be replicated in the minds of others.
[Guest]: What's extremely interesting, I'm writing about this in my new book, but you know that
[Guest]: we are, we're a species that really looks for attention one way or the other, right?
[Guest]: That this is, and in fact, even the way we've evolved, we can, we have, you know, neuroscientists
[Guest]: have now shown us that we have special areas of the brain, special neurons that are devoted
[Guest]: to being able to see when people are looking directly at us, those neurons will fire.
[Guest]: If people's eyes are directly on us, a few inches, a few centimeters, either way, other
[Guest]: neurons will fire.
[Guest]: So we have this detection system, right, of when people are paying attention to us.
[Guest]: And I, you know, I've had experience with little babies, my own, and other little babies
[Guest]: at such an early age, they are making eye contact, extreme eye contact.
[Guest]: We're so dependent, we're a gregarious species, we're very, very dependent on the care of
[Guest]: others for a very long time, we have a very long childhood and adolescence, it gets longer
[Guest]: and longer, I know 45-year-olds now who are still adolescents, but that's another story.
[Guest]: But so this dependence on our own kind makes us very susceptible to attention.
[Guest]: So what we see in the Axial Age with these gods that most of, you know, how do we want
[Guest]: to feel that we matter, it's put in terms of, you know, sort of the gods, but the Greeks
[Guest]: were very special because the way that their stories of their gods develop, you don't want
[Guest]: too much attention from these gods.
[Guest]: Something bad always happens when a god pays too much attention to you.
[Guest]: So you want to be glorious, but not so glorious so that the gods feel that you're competition.
[Guest]: I think of them because I have older brothers and sisters, you know, that the Greek gods
[Guest]: are sort of like older brothers and sisters, you know, they want you to emulate them and
[Guest]: to revere them, but then if you start to surpass them, they're going to slap you back into
[Guest]: your place very, very quickly.
[Guest]: So it's, the Greek gods are something like this, so they develop this kind of, it was
[Guest]: a highly religious society, saturated with religious rituals, but those were mostly to
[Guest]: appease the gods, you know, to their apotropaic, that is warding off evil.
[Guest]: You don't, you know, so don't pay too much attention and I'm paying proper respect to
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: But in terms of what they wanted, the attention that they wanted to make them feel like they
[Guest]: matter was from fellow citizens and from future generations.
[Guest]: So do something big so that the poets will sing of you, which was their social media
[Amit Varma]: of the day, the poets.
[Amit Varma]: And sort of the fascinating turning point, which is also at the heart of your book Plato
[Amit Varma]: at the Googleplex, is when from kleos we come to the concept of areta.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: So areta is, you know, what excellence, our word aristocracy, you know, comes from this
[Guest]: world, the rule of the excellent.
[Amit Varma]: Benjamin Javid translated it as virtue, but as you pointed out, that doesn't capture
[Amit Varma]: all its favors.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So it originally had meant this, you know, sort of excellence.
[Guest]: You could talk about the areta of a knife or of a horse, you know, so it was the excellence
[Guest]: of this thing in ancient Greek.
[Guest]: And it's really the influence of the philosophers, of Socrates and of Plato, how it comes to
[Guest]: mean virtue rather than any kind of excellence, because part of the attack of the philosophers
[Guest]: on the normative framework of their society, why Socrates was put to death, was that the
[Guest]: claim is, you know, not just any kind of kleos will do the trick.
[Guest]: It has to be areta, it has to be true excellence, and what they argue for is that true excellence
[Guest]: consists in knowledge, wisdom, virtue, justice, courage, you know, the virtues.
[Guest]: So the term undergoes this transformation.
[Guest]: And you know, by the time we get to the Gospels, you know, written in Greek, areta simply means,
[Guest]: you know, virtue.
[Guest]: It just means virtue.
[Guest]: This is the transformation that these philosophers who are writing, well not Socrates, he didn't
[Guest]: write, but Plato, Aristotle, and the philosophers who follow them, that this was a transformation
[Amit Varma]: of the word.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you point out how, you know, Plato's Socrates sort of begins to take areta away
[Amit Varma]: from kleos or the recognition and sort of shows that it can exist independent of recognition
[Amit Varma]: that you can be virtuous even if no one else sees your virtue.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to quote a great, a very nice passage that kind of illustrates that from your book.
[Amit Varma]: Start quote, in the Gorgias, is that the right way to pronounce it?
[Amit Varma]: In the Gorgias, Socrates is presented as asserting something so radical that his hearers think
[Amit Varma]: it has to be a joke.
[Amit Varma]: He would, he says, rather be treated unjustly than treat others unjustly.
[Amit Varma]: But if areta is conceived of as analogous to the health of the body, then Socrates'
[Amit Varma]: statement is hardly absurd.
[Amit Varma]: The injustice that we do involves us far more intimately than the injustice that we suffer.
[Amit Varma]: I don't only act out of character, my character reacts to my actions.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And it becomes this, it gets transformed in the Socratic-Platonic attack on their own
[Guest]: society's values into, yeah, it's something internal.
[Guest]: It's not the applause.
[Guest]: It's not outer attention.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, you may be getting no applause whatsoever.
[Guest]: You may be getting a brooming cup of hemlock as Socrates got, you know, and yet it's this,
[Guest]: if your character is being transformed in the right direction, this, this is what, what
[Guest]: counts.
[Guest]: And, you know, and then the, the, the whole question becomes, well, what is the right
[Guest]: direction?
[Guest]: What are the virtues?
[Guest]: How do we know?
[Guest]: How do we judge?
[Guest]: Uh, what are the right virtues?
[Guest]: You know, which becomes, you know, a central theme of philosophy and what is really knowledge,
[Guest]: you know, becomes a central theme of epistemology.
[Guest]: So philosophy is often running with this transformation of, you know, from the, the attention and
[Guest]: approbation of your fellow citizens to know that that's not a reliable means of judging
[Guest]: whether you're living your life as you ought to live it.
[Guest]: And in fact, it's something far more private, something that takes a tremendous amount of
[Guest]: striving, but not striving just to be replicated in other people's minds.
[Guest]: In fact, you may be in the eyes of your fellow citizens, a nobody, a failure, a loser, um,
[Guest]: to use one of the favorite phrases of our current president of the United States, you
[Amit Varma]: know, loser.
[Unknown]: Everybody's a loser.
[Unknown]: Sad.
[Guest]: Um, you know, and, uh, yeah, so, you know, this is a very good example.
[Guest]: I mean, I somehow, you know, being American, everything nowadays comes back to Trump, right?
[Guest]: He colonizes our minds in a terrible way.
[Guest]: But yet you look at this life, I mean, this is a person who is after, um, kleos, um, attention,
[Guest]: outward attention in the biggest way possible.
[Guest]: He has to be thought of by every citizen, every citizen on the globe, every human, and
[Guest]: he is, um, is this a successful life by Greek standards?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: You know, by pre-philosophical, the Homeric ethos of the extraordinary, yes, he's an extraordinary
[Guest]: person, right?
[Guest]: He is replicated in all of our minds.
[Guest]: Um, you know, what would Socrates and Plato have to say about him?
[Guest]: We know what Socrates and Plato would have to say about him.
[Guest]: And the fact that so many of us would echo Socrates and Plato's opinion, um, of, of,
[Guest]: of this kind of kleos, this outward domination of the world consciousness shows how much,
[Guest]: um, philosophy has in fact, uh, infiltrated, uh, our minds.
[Guest]: This is one of the theme, you know, this, the, um, subtitle of this book is why philosophy
[Guest]: won't go away.
[Guest]: And this is an ongoing argument I have in my background is in science.
[Guest]: I come from a science, you know, from physics and mathematics.
[Guest]: Um, most of my friends and all of my husbands have been themselves scientists.
[Guest]: And so this question of, um, what is philosophy adding here?
[Guest]: And it's very hard to see philosophical progress because it's the progress with which we see,
[Guest]: you know, those of us who are judging a person like Trump to be, you know, a failure, he's
[Guest]: calling everybody a loser, but that he's a loser himself in the true sense, in the biggest
[Guest]: sense, a waste of the human life, um, and a waste of tremendous privilege and resources.
[Guest]: Um, why are we doing this?
[Guest]: I mean, this, this, this is a, a, a kind of progress that was begun with Socrates and
[Guest]: Plato's, uh, argument with those values of their own society.
[Guest]: And that has, uh, you know, continued and infiltrated all of our, in fact, a very funny
[Amit Varma]: illustration of this progress of philosophy in your book, where you have all these dialogues
[Amit Varma]: with Plato in modern settings is when he's at the Googleplex and he's surprised to learn
[Guest]: that slavery is no more.
[Amit Varma]: He is charmed and beguiled by the arguments against slavery that the person who is with
[Guest]: him gives him.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And, and, and she, of course, you know, I made her, it's a little bit of comic relief,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: But she's the meteor escort when a writer is on a book tour, somebody meets them in
[Guest]: each city and takes them around to all of their events.
[Guest]: And um, and they, they tend to be usually, you know, very amusing people and, you know,
[Guest]: charming, but you know, not, not intellectuals really.
[Guest]: And I, so my media escort in this kind of telling how this very flaky kind of person
[Amit Varma]: is actually giving such a solid philosophical argument, which has come from Plato himself
[Guest]: in some sense, because how does philosophy make progress?
[Guest]: We don't make progress in terms of, um, experiments or, you know, laboratory empirical, it's not
[Guest]: an empirical science clearly.
[Guest]: Um, but the way we make progress here is, you know, we, we keep seeing the implications
[Guest]: of, um, commitments that we've already made and the strongest being commitments to our
[Guest]: own life that we ourselves feel that we matter, or in any case we want to matter, it matters
[Guest]: to us whether we matter.
[Guest]: That is what it is to pursue a life.
[Guest]: Your life has to matter to you in order just to pursue it.
[Guest]: Um, what are the, what, what follows from this?
[Guest]: And, and so many times we don't see what follows from this and we were inconsistent and that's
[Guest]: exactly how philosophy makes progress by looking at things that we've already committed ourselves
[Guest]: to that we can't live our lives without committing ourselves to and seeing how we, how we are
[Guest]: inconsistent, that this has consequences, logical consequences, and you know, we don't
[Guest]: see them.
[Guest]: And that's, in fact, this was this, uh, this is why the reductio ad absurdum, this form
[Guest]: of argument was the favored form of Socrates, right?
[Guest]: He developed this, you know, here you're committed to this, here are your premises, and yet you're
[Guest]: not committed to this.
[Guest]: Do you see the inconsistency?
[Guest]: And he, he would point out to people their inconsistencies, which didn't win him great
[Amit Varma]: popularity.
[Amit Varma]: And it didn't work out well for the poor guy and, and part of the reason why it didn't
[Amit Varma]: work out well for him is because the Athenian sense of Aretha was tied up with the state.
[Amit Varma]: You had to have the validation of the state.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another quote, which, you know, if you replace Athenian with say American,
[Amit Varma]: the court might still make sense.
[Amit Varma]: Start quote, Athenian superiority drew itself to more superiority, intensifying its sense
[Amit Varma]: of his own exceptionalism, which typically happens with imperial powers.
[Guest]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: Yes, exactly.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And so, you know, it was a great, if you have a society whose, whose normative framework
[Guest]: is built on, you know, everybody has to be exceptional.
[Guest]: Well, the big problem is, of course, most of us are not exceptional, right?
[Guest]: We're perfectly, but yes, I mean, by definition, we're ordinary, most of us.
[Guest]: And so what, you know, what did you do?
[Guest]: Well, you, I call it participatory exceptionalism.
[Guest]: You know, you're participating in an exceptional city state and of course, Athens was the most,
[Guest]: it was a given premise, a firm premise among all of the ancient Greeks of no matter what
[Guest]: city state that they were the best in the world, right?
[Guest]: This comes very naturally to our species.
[Guest]: And you know, in fact, their word for a foreigner is barbarian because, and it comes from their
[Guest]: word for blah, blah, blah, what, you know, just is bar, bar, bar, you know, you can't
[Guest]: understand what they're saying.
[Guest]: So they're barbarians, right?
[Guest]: And it simply meant not Greek speakers.
[Guest]: And so, but there was that, that kind of implication, lesser, there are lesser people.
[Guest]: And then among these exceptional Greek speakers, the most exceptional, the creme de la creme
[Guest]: were the Athenians, right?
[Guest]: And it was, it was an imperial power.
[Guest]: They were an imperialist over their fellow Greek city states.
[Guest]: And they were also a great draw for their, for all of the most creative people.
[Guest]: So you know, Aristotle was not born in Athens, he came to Athens, he came to Athens to study
[Guest]: in Plato's Academy, the first European university that was founded by Plato.
[Guest]: And so there was this, this sense that the way you can achieve something big and extraordinary
[Guest]: is by being a citizen of an extraordinary state.
[Guest]: So there's this nationalist fervor that is so strong because the whole existential longing
[Guest]: to make something of your life was tied, tied up in this.
[Guest]: And this is a way, of course, that we all, it's a way we all try to do it, by the group
[Guest]: we belong to, you know, that this is a way of, rather than the values that we cultivate
[Guest]: within our soul, the group that we belong to.
[Amit Varma]: And where Plato, Socrates kind of moved away from this was by saying that it was in a sense
[Amit Varma]: by rejecting the Athenian notion of arete, and saying that virtue comes not from belonging
[Amit Varma]: to an exceptional state, but from knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it very fascinating where you talk about the sublime braid, which is the
[Amit Varma]: connection between truth and beauty and virtue, and the notion that from knowledge arises
[Amit Varma]: virtue.
[Amit Varma]: Can you explain that to me?
[Guest]: So it's, yeah, the truth, beauty and goodness are entwined with each other.
[Guest]: This is so fundamental in Plato.
[Guest]: One of the reasons I like Plato, although I do not think that everything he said was
[Guest]: right, clearly not right.
[Guest]: But again, how could I think that philosophy makes progress and think that everything Plato
[Guest]: said was right?
[Guest]: No, we can, we've made so much progress, we can look back at Plato and say, no, you were
[Guest]: wrong about this, this and this, and many other things.
[Guest]: But something that's very fundamental about him, he changed his mind many times.
[Guest]: And this discipline that he really founded for us is a very self-critical, it's reason,
[Guest]: but everything is open to reason.
[Guest]: Everything has to be justified.
[Guest]: And so there's a great self-critical capacity that has to be cultivated in order to be a
[Guest]: philosopher.
[Guest]: I feel that any philosopher who hasn't changed her mind many times over the course of her
[Guest]: life is really not being a good philosopher because this is critical, this self-criticism.
[Guest]: So but one of the things that stays permanent with him is that, what I call the sublime
[Guest]: grade, the intertwining of these three most important things for him, truth and beauty
[Guest]: and goodness, and that they all are connected, they're embedded with each other.
[Guest]: You can't achieve any one without the other.
[Guest]: So for example, how can we tell that something is true?
[Guest]: There has to be a beautiful explanation.
[Guest]: So if we have, you know, two or more explanations that are, that can accommodate all of the
[Guest]: things that we're trying to explain, all of the evidence, we go with the most beautiful
[Guest]: one, the most elegant one, in some sense the simplest one.
[Guest]: But there's an aesthetic evaluation of that as a criterion for truth.
[Guest]: Now, I come from a background in physics and that is very, very apparent in physics.
[Guest]: You know that when we, for example, turned away from the geocentric view, that the heavens
[Guest]: all revolved around the earth and moved the Copernican Revolution to the heliocentric
[Guest]: universe, both systems could accommodate all of the empirical evidence, the movements of
[Guest]: the planets and all of this, but one of them was really messy.
[Guest]: You had to keep adding more and more epicycles.
[Guest]: It was mathematically grotesque, right, and one, all you had to do was change the orientation
[Guest]: and make the sun the center with the earth moving and the, everything became, the explanation
[Guest]: itself became beautiful, became mathematically simple.
[Guest]: We still, this is still the case, you know, so for, you know, all the way, you know, with
[Guest]: relativity theory, when Einstein proposed the general theory of relativity, he had very
[Guest]: little empirical evidence for it.
[Guest]: What he had was beautiful mathematics, the mathematics is stunning, the theory itself
[Guest]: is stunning and when it, it, it, he was proposed, the general theory was published in 1915,
[Guest]: had to wait until 1919 until he had any empirical evidence for it.
[Guest]: They needed a complete eclipse, a solar eclipse so that they could see whether or not, I won't,
[Guest]: I won't go into it.
[Amit Varma]: I, I, I get that connection between truth and beauty, that a certain truth about the
[Amit Varma]: universe is expressed beautifully by E is equal to MC squared, say, but how does knowing
[Guest]: that translate to virtue?
[Guest]: To virtue.
[Guest]: So here is what Plato believed.
[Guest]: He believed that if we really assimilate truth, which takes, first of all, that itself takes
[Guest]: virtue.
[Guest]: It takes taming of the ego, right?
[Guest]: Because we have a great tendency to believe what's true, what, if it most flatters ourselves,
[Guest]: our place in society, our place in the universe, I mean, why did we think that the earth had
[Guest]: to be the center of the universe with all the heavens revolving around us, right?
[Guest]: It flatters our, our sense of importance in the cosmos, you know, so just to be able to
[Guest]: attain the truth means you have to subdue the ego somewhat, right?
[Guest]: But that also, when we see the truth, our perspective is so broadened.
[Guest]: We see ourselves in this greatest perspective, the grandest perspective, and that itself,
[Guest]: you know, expands our virtue, gives us a tolerance, and we don't take ourselves so damn seriously,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I mean, this is, this is the aim of ethics to, we see ourselves in some perspectives
[Guest]: in regard with other, of our fellow citizens and fellow creatures and our planet itself,
[Guest]: our cosmos itself.
[Guest]: This is what it is to be virtuous.
[Guest]: So yeah, so that's how these things all become intertwined.
[Guest]: I just wanted to say this, this one thing that Einstein had said when he finally was
[Guest]: brought the evidence for the general theory of relativity, that yes, light, the mass of,
[Guest]: the mass of the sun actually did shift light in the way that he had predicted, and it was
[Guest]: a huge, you know, success for this theory.
[Guest]: And so a philosopher of science, Hans-Reichenbach, asked him, how did you feel when you finally
[Guest]: got news that your theory had been vindicated?
[Guest]: And he said, oh, no, I already knew it had to be true because it's so beautiful.
[Guest]: So the empirical evidence just didn't even matter so much.
[Guest]: So you know, this, and this we can trace all the way back to Plato.
[Amit Varma]: On that elegant note, we'll take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: We'll be back in a minute.
[Unknown]: Hello, everybody.
[Unknown]: Welcome to a great week on IBM podcast.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram.
[Unknown]: We launched our listener survey last week, and we'd like you to really participate in
[Unknown]: that if you haven't already.
[Unknown]: We're offering a free mug for a few select winners if you fill out the survey and give
[Unknown]: us your email address.
[Unknown]: So go to the website, ibmpodcast.com slash survey, and there's a link over there to filling
[Unknown]: out the survey.
[Unknown]: Please do.
[Unknown]: And we'd really appreciate that.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says, Cyrus' guest is policy professional Meghnad, as Meghnad sheds light on working
[Unknown]: with parliamentarians, some trivia about our laws, and his new podcast, How to Citizen.
[Unknown]: On How to Citizen, we're on chapter six, understanding our criminal justice system.
[Unknown]: Our guest for the episode is comedian Aishwarya Mohanraj.
[Unknown]: The host and Aishwarya ponder the inequalities of justice and what would be a way to put
[Unknown]: it right.
[Unknown]: On Simplified, Chuck and Srikant take another look at Brexit and the predicaments in store
[Unknown]: for the UK in March.
[Unknown]: On Puliyabazi, the host is in conversation with Dr. Anil Shukla, who served as Deputy
[Unknown]: Election Commissioner to investigate the Indian electoral process.
[Unknown]: On the Habit Coach podcast, Ashwin talks about how the technique of box breathing helps fight
[Unknown]: anxiety.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's continue with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the most revelatory points while reading your book was that way back
[Amit Varma]: then, when all the other normative religions were sort of taking root, you had Socrates
[Amit Varma]: basically demolishing the notion of God by asking Yutipro, I hope I'm pronouncing that
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: Yutipro.
[Amit Varma]: Yutipro.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this fantastic question where he says, quote, is what is holy, holy because the gods
[Amit Varma]: approve it?
[Amit Varma]: Or do they approve it because it's holy?
[Guest]: Yeah, this is fantastic.
[Guest]: It's one of Plato's early dialogues.
[Guest]: And the argument that Socrates puts forth there, or that Plato has Socrates putting
[Guest]: forth there, has been repeated by freethinkers throughout the ages.
[Guest]: You know, Spinoza, who's a great favorite philosopher of mine, the 17th century Jewish
[Guest]: rationalist philosopher, very much following in the footsteps of Plato, you know, it's
[Guest]: repeated by him.
[Guest]: And in our own day, Sam Harris, you know, repeats this argument and people don't always
[Guest]: attribute it to Plato, but he's the one who first formulated this extremely elegant argument.
[Amit Varma]: Just for the listeners, I'll kind of quickly explain what it's essentially saying is that
[Amit Varma]: if there are normative moral codes that you follow because God tells you to follow it,
[Amit Varma]: are you doing that because he, like, is he telling you to do good things because there
[Amit Varma]: is a reason for those to be good, in which case those reasons are enough in themselves.
[Guest]: You don't need the God.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And if there are no reasons, then why do it?
[Guest]: And why do it?
[Guest]: I mean, if it's simply a caprice of God, you know, a whim, you know, do this, you know,
[Guest]: give charity to the widow and to the orphan rather than, you know, persecute them.
[Guest]: There's no additional reason that dictates this moral choice.
[Guest]: Does that really answer the question we're asking when we want to know what makes good
[Guest]: actions good?
[Guest]: What makes evil evil?
[Guest]: Just the whims and caprices of an immoral God.
[Guest]: So no, we feel not, you know, we feel no.
[Guest]: There's a reason God wants us to do this rather than that.
[Guest]: Well, then if there's the reason, that's the reason, and God is redundant.
[Guest]: It's a very elegant argument.
[Guest]: And you know, I think sometimes it's against my will in certain debates with theists who
[Guest]: want to argue there can't be no morality without God.
[Guest]: And you know, this is an argument that I have had to face so many times.
[Guest]: And you know, you give them, for me, the best response is Plato's argument, you know, 2400
[Guest]: years ago, pre-Christian, pre-Jewish, you know, but that it's, yeah, it's a very, very
[Amit Varma]: elegant argument.
[Amit Varma]: And this brings me to my next question, which is really puzzling, which is that you have
[Amit Varma]: this outbreak of what we would call rationality in this period where Socrates and Plato and
[Amit Varma]: Aristotle are doing well.
[Amit Varma]: And then you have this long sort of interval until the Enlightenment in the 18th century
[Amit Varma]: before you have that.
[Amit Varma]: And the rest of the time is all of those religions, those monotheistic cults, all of that thinking
[Amit Varma]: you should have, you would think would go away with Plato's question, at least the rationalism
[Amit Varma]: would survive.
[Amit Varma]: But it disappears for several hundred years.
[Guest]: Why is that?
[Guest]: Well, you know, partly, you know, one of the problems with this religion of reason, you
[Guest]: could almost call it, right, or a normativity of reason, is that it requires a lot of hard
[Guest]: work.
[Guest]: It requires education.
[Guest]: You don't get the most comforting answers from it, right?
[Guest]: You know, it depends on us.
[Guest]: It's very human-centric.
[Guest]: It makes the universe a kind of cold and uncaring place, an impersonal place.
[Guest]: It's not surprising it broke out in ancient Greece, given what they thought of their gods,
[Guest]: which were, they're downright, you know, hostile to us.
[Guest]: But it doesn't, whereas the, you know, the Judeo-Christian Muslim view, which captured
[Guest]: the world, is that it's very powerful.
[Guest]: It gives us a sense of cosmic significance.
[Guest]: You know, I, myself, had started out that way.
[Guest]: I was born into an extremely religious family.
[Guest]: I know what it feels like to make the transition of feeling, you know, that God is watching
[Guest]: everything I do, which is terrifying because, I mean, it's really, there's no privacy whatsoever.
[Guest]: And also, you know, he's a very stern God.
[Guest]: He's judging if you do and, you know, in Judaism, which was my birth religion, it's, you know,
[Guest]: there are laws for absolutely everything, laws specifically for women to keep them in
[Guest]: their place.
[Guest]: And these rankled me very much.
[Guest]: These did not go down well with me.
[Guest]: But one thing you never doubt, and that is that you matter.
[Guest]: I mean, because you matter to the Lord of the universe.
[Guest]: He created you intentionally.
[Guest]: He has designed, you know, he created you rather than somebody else.
[Guest]: So you have your place in the universe.
[Guest]: You know, what I was saying about that village that, you know, that predates the axial age,
[Guest]: in some sense, it makes the universe a village, you know, that we all have, I've never thought
[Guest]: of that before, actually, but that we all have our place, you know, with the head chief,
[Guest]: you know, is there.
[Guest]: And he had a really great...
[Amit Varma]: Always a man.
[Guest]: Always a man.
[Guest]: And he had, you know, he has designs on us.
[Guest]: And it's a comforting and it sort of replicates, you know, where we came from, that tribal
[Guest]: village life.
[Guest]: So it is our default, I think.
[Guest]: And reason is pushing against that.
[Guest]: And so I think it was such a powerful replication of the village intimacy, only on the cosmic
[Guest]: scale that was presented to the world.
[Guest]: It's not surprising.
[Guest]: Also, it promises us an afterlife.
[Guest]: I mean, it makes us extremely, you know, it assuages some of our deepest fears, which
[Guest]: is that, you know, in the great scheme of things, we're really not so very much.
[Guest]: No, we don't want to feel that.
[Guest]: We fear death.
[Guest]: All of these things.
[Guest]: And it really palliates and speaks to our deepest fears.
[Amit Varma]: One of the interesting points that you, the arguments that you address in the introduction
[Amit Varma]: to your book, in fact, is about how people often say that philosophy, even today, is
[Amit Varma]: just a set of footnotes to Plato, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And people therefore make the argument, including I'm sure some of your scientist friends, that
[Amit Varma]: science has progressed so much, you know, no one would say that science is like footnotes
[Amit Varma]: to Pythagoras or whoever.
[Amit Varma]: But with philosophy, we keep going back to Plato and finding it very relevant.
[Amit Varma]: And you can actually begin an argument there.
[Guest]: What do you have to say to that?
[Guest]: Several things.
[Guest]: I think that, you know, it was Alfred North Whitehead, a 20th century philosopher and
[Guest]: logician who had said that the truest thing you can say about Western philosophy is that
[Guest]: it consists of a series of footnotes to Plato.
[Guest]: And this is a very good soundbite, but like most soundbites, it's a gross oversimplification.
[Guest]: What you can say about Plato and the reason that he's so very important is that he had
[Guest]: a real sense for what the philosophical questions were and what answers a philosophical question
[Guest]: and what doesn't answer a philosophical question.
[Guest]: And he found philosophical questions lurking in every area.
[Guest]: So he lays out the landscape of philosophy, that we can say, the different areas, you
[Guest]: know, philosophy of religion that we spoke about a little bit and, you know, and theory
[Guest]: of knowledge, epistemology, moral philosophy, political philosophy, you know, all these
[Guest]: different, but that there are always these philosophical questions that arise that are
[Guest]: not one with the fields themselves.
[Guest]: They're meta questions.
[Guest]: They're about the philosophy of science, you know.
[Guest]: So it's not that he laid out all of the answers, as I say, we can look back and see how many
[Guest]: mistakes he made.
[Guest]: I mean, his theory of forms.
[Guest]: I don't know anybody who holds by this philosophy of language.
[Guest]: He asked the important questions and he proposed his theory of form.
[Guest]: What is a meaning?
[Guest]: How does a word acquire meaning?
[Guest]: And he had this theory of forms.
[Guest]: We have philosophy of language now, very complicated, very sophisticated.
[Guest]: It's not Platonic, right?
[Guest]: It's not Plato's answers are not the answers, but Plato's questions, time and again, are
[Guest]: the questions.
[Guest]: But we've made, we've made progress with them.
[Guest]: The other thing is the more scientific progress we make, the more philosophical questions
[Guest]: are churned up by the scientific progress.
[Amit Varma]: And so, you know, in fact, as you say, philosophy raises the proto-scientific questions that
[Guest]: is, yes.
[Guest]: So often philosophers will first ask the scientific question that kind of motivates the science
[Guest]: and finally the methodology emerges that could, that could answer these questions.
[Guest]: But that's not its only role.
[Guest]: It also looks at what science, you know, the current science of the day is telling us and
[Guest]: helps to determine what it's answering and what it's not answering.
[Guest]: So for something like, for example, neuroscience.
[Guest]: So we've learned so much more about consciousness, you know, through cognitive science and through
[Guest]: neuroscience, we can map the brain and see where different aspects of consciousness,
[Guest]: where they're located.
[Guest]: And, you know, I think neuroscience has made it extremely probable that consciousness is
[Guest]: a brain process, right?
[Guest]: That it's, it is, it is a material physical process.
[Guest]: Has it thereby eliminated the notion of agency, that we're actually in control of our actions?
[Guest]: Has it shown that we can possibly be free, that the sense that we have of actually making
[Guest]: choices of, of just deliberating and deciding is an illusion.
[Guest]: So this is a philosophical question.
[Guest]: So look at what science has so far established and then see what it implies, what it doesn't
[Guest]: imply.
[Guest]: What's, what's still open.
[Guest]: Scientists are often very eager to, to interpret their findings in the broadest way possible.
[Guest]: So you'll find many neuroscientists, you know, I mean, we've answered all of these philosophical
[Guest]: questions and that's where people trained in philosophy, you know, they have to look,
[Guest]: know the science, be trained in the science.
[Guest]: But as the philosophical question, does it really entail what the scientists are saying
[Guest]: that it entails?
[Guest]: I mean, in physics, which was the, the, the science, the scientific field that I'm most
[Guest]: interested in, that I had most studied in university, there is, you know, we have this
[Guest]: very strange theory, quantum mechanics, and we don't quite know how to interpret it.
[Guest]: And you know, when I was taking my physics courses, there was one view, you know, about
[Guest]: quantum mechanics, which is, was associated with Niels Bohr, was called Copenhagen interpretation,
[Guest]: which is that, you know, things don't exist until you measure them.
[Guest]: So to ask where is the particle before it's measured, where, you know, where had it been
[Guest]: before, is a meaningless question.
[Guest]: You know, this is a philosophical view.
[Guest]: And what happened was philosophers began to examine this view and say, look, here's quantum
[Guest]: mechanics.
[Guest]: Here's what you found.
[Guest]: The interpretation of quantum mechanics, this is philosophical, is it good philosophy?
[Guest]: And they're the ones who really prodded physicists so that they came up with other interpretations
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: There's the Bohmian interpretation.
[Guest]: There's the multiverse interpretation.
[Guest]: These things were first proposed by, by philosophical thinking.
[Guest]: So this is another way in which the more progress we make with our science and getting into
[Guest]: stranger and stranger things, to see what it implies and what it doesn't imply.
[Guest]: And that, that is, that's the work I think very much of philosophy.
[Guest]: What philosophy is after is to maximize our overall coherence, to see what we know and
[Guest]: what other possibilities that leaves open, closes off, to try to make us as consistent
[Guest]: and coherent.
[Guest]: That has always been the role of philosophy ever since Socrates was wandering around asking
[Guest]: his annoying questions of his fellow citizens.
[Amit Varma]: And just speaking of those annoying questions and what the task of philosophy is, there's
[Amit Varma]: another great passage from your book I'd like to quote, which is, quote, truth cannot be
[Amit Varma]: transmitted from one mind to another, the pouring out of the full flask of a master
[Amit Varma]: into the passive receptacle of a student.
[Amit Varma]: Truth seeking comes from the violent activity of philosophy, a drama enacted deep in the
[Amit Varma]: interior of each of us and which manages in its violence to deprive us of positions that
[Amit Varma]: may be so deeply and constitutively personal that we can't defend them to others.
[Amit Varma]: This violent activity is personal, even as it leads one in an impersonal direction where
[Amit Varma]: interpersonal agreement is possible.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this kind of also sort of describes the Socratic method of how he did his dialogues
[Amit Varma]: and ask questions and got down to the essence of everything.
[Amit Varma]: So my question to you is, would Socratic dialogue therefore be effective today in this polarized
[Guest]: age?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I certainly, I certainly think so.
[Amit Varma]: He would get torn apart on Twitter, for example.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: He'd seem like a troll.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, yeah, one of the things that I think is very true of the philosophical
[Guest]: enterprise is the dialogue is extremely important.
[Guest]: You know, it began with the dialogue.
[Guest]: Socrates never even wrote anything down because he believed in the lived conversation.
[Guest]: It has to be minds clashing with other minds, and that's the way these deep intuitions that
[Guest]: we don't even realize we have, because they're so deep down within us, that they can be brought
[Guest]: to the floor and other people who don't share your intuitions will say, defend them, account
[Guest]: for them, tell us why I ought to believe in them.
[Guest]: And then, you know, sometimes you realize you really have no reason whatsoever.
[Guest]: And that's how progress is made.
[Guest]: One of the wonderful things that's happened in our own day is that, you know, more and
[Guest]: more people are brought into this conversation.
[Guest]: A person like me, a woman, would not have been part of this conversation for very long.
[Guest]: And I have seen over the course of my lifetime how this has changed.
[Guest]: When I entered into philosophy, I was the only woman in the room, especially because
[Guest]: I did philosophy of science, philosophy of mathematics.
[Guest]: These were really considered unfeminine, right, areas of philosophy.
[Guest]: I was the only woman in the room.
[Guest]: I'm not anymore, right?
[Guest]: There are many women.
[Guest]: But this itself has brought philosophical questions into the conversation that were
[Guest]: invisible to men, such as raising children, you know, questions about what is the right
[Guest]: way, you know, children have been, care for the planet.
[Guest]: I mean, the ecological concerns have become, you know, in general, for all of us, a very,
[Guest]: very important part of philosophy, but more what we call applied ethics, rather than just
[Guest]: grand theories of ethics, applied ethics, you know, really specific questions that are
[Guest]: facing us have become much more prominent.
[Amit Varma]: Like the trolley problem applied to autonomous cars, for example.
[Guest]: Yes, yes, things of this sort that have, for some reason, you know, that women have found
[Guest]: this, less grand theories and more applied ethics, you know, that are, you know, so ecology,
[Guest]: family ethics, medical ethics, you find many, many women in medical ethics.
[Guest]: So this is interesting to watch, and even the analogies that are, you know, we are always,
[Guest]: one of the things that we do to test our intuitions is to do thought experiments, you know, and
[Guest]: they're pretty wacky, often, the trolley problem seems to be an example of a thought experiment.
[Guest]: The kinds of thought experiments that I hear now being proposed are often, you know, sort
[Guest]: of coming from a woman's life, from a woman's perspective, a woman's sense of priorities,
[Guest]: and so the wider the group that we bring in, people from different cultures, the better,
[Guest]: because we come, the different cultures, the different life experiences give us such different
[Guest]: intuitions that are invisible to the person.
[Amit Varma]: But why I brought up the Socratic notion of dialogue in the modern age was, does it worry
[Amit Varma]: you, for example, that in the last 10 years, what we've seen with social media and people
[Amit Varma]: living so much of their lives online, is that people shut themselves off in echo chambers,
[Amit Varma]: where they spend a lot of time posturing to raise their status within their in-group,
[Amit Varma]: but don't really talk to each other, they just talk past each other.
[Guest]: You know, when the World Wide Web, as we used to call it, was first proposed, this seemed
[Guest]: the most liberating idea to a person like me, oh, now I can talk to people in India,
[Guest]: I can talk to people in Afghanistan, and in Saudi Arabia, and I do, actually, talk to,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it can be used this way.
[Amit Varma]: And the huge net benefit remains.
[Guest]: Yes, but what we hadn't foreseen is what happened.
[Guest]: Human nature, the worst of us, asserting itself in this new social media range.
[Guest]: And so these echo chambers, and you only search out your own opinions that are so validated
[Guest]: and strengthened, because everybody you're talking agrees with this.
[Guest]: So, and this is, of course, the exact opposite of what the Socratic dialogue is supposed
[Guest]: to be about, which is, again, I, myself, it's interesting, because psychologists have shown
[Guest]: us that we, there's an endorphin lift, there's a kind of surge.
[Guest]: When you hear your own opinions replicated in others, you feel good.
[Guest]: And so...
[Amit Varma]: So it's healthy to be in an echo chamber?
[Guest]: Yes, it feels good.
[Guest]: But you know, as soon as I read this, I started to read publications, you know, newspapers
[Guest]: and periodicals that are, that I very much disagree with, right?
[Guest]: And yes, I feel angry, you know, I don't feel, I don't feel comfortable reading these things.
[Guest]: But I, you know, I force myself to, and I force myself to think out, well, what are
[Guest]: they assuming that I'm not assuming?
[Guest]: How do I defend my assumptions against their assumptions?
[Guest]: It's a lot of work, right?
[Guest]: This is a lot of work, but, and it's uncomfortable, and it doesn't feel so very good.
[Guest]: But I think, I think that this is part of what it is to be an enlightened person.
[Guest]: To be an enlightened person is to be aware of the things that you're assuming, and that
[Guest]: they're not necessarily true to other people, and do you really have good reasons?
[Guest]: Could you convince them?
[Guest]: What's the best that you could give them to try to change their minds?
[Guest]: If we did that...
[Amit Varma]: Are you generally hopeful that we're moving in the right direction?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: Oh, I don't know.
[Guest]: Yes, maybe.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Guest]: Okay, well, one, I've taken enough of your time.
[Guest]: I know you've got to go.
[Amit Varma]: So one, one kind of final question I've been waiting to ask, and you kind of alluded to
[Amit Varma]: it a while back.
[Amit Varma]: Do you believe in free will?
[Amit Varma]: Because when you talk about virtue coming from knowledge, if you have complete knowledge,
[Amit Varma]: doesn't that then make philosophy meaningless and virtue moot?
[Guest]: Oh, that's a deep, it's a deep question.
[Guest]: You know, I believe in, you know, to believe that we have this ability to look at our own
[Guest]: thought processes and be self-critical about them and change our mind about them, without
[Guest]: believing in that degree of freedom, you know, we can't make any sense out of what it is
[Guest]: to be rational.
[Guest]: So if we're committed to reason, we have to be committed to some degree of freedom.
[Amit Varma]: To at least the illusion of free will.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: No, I think we have to be even more.
[Guest]: It's like, to say that there really is, you know, rational behavior, rational beliefs
[Guest]: justify belief, and those which are irrational and unjustified, and that therefore ought
[Guest]: not to be believed, right?
[Guest]: There is a normative presupposition that is enfolded in epistemology itself.
[Guest]: To be committed to that, we have to be committed to some degree of freedom.
[Guest]: When I see, when I examine my own thought processes, because you come at me with these
[Guest]: trenchant questions, and I say, well, I really don't know how to answer them.
[Guest]: I better go back to the drawing board and rethink it, and maybe I will, I will change
[Guest]: my mind.
[Guest]: That is, that's a presumption of being a reasonable person at all.
[Guest]: So if, you know, what we have learned undermines reason itself, then we have no reason to even
[Guest]: trust what we have learned, right?
[Guest]: It's a, it's a kind of Pyrrhic victory.
[Guest]: It will, it will destroy any claims we have to, to truth, to knowledge, to reason.
[Guest]: So to that degree, I think we have to, we have to countenance free will.
[Guest]: Rebekah, thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed our conversation.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, then you can follow Rebekah on Twitter at
[Amit Varma]: Plato Book Tour, all one word, at Plato Book Tour.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: In every episode, we get a new guest and discuss one chapter from the 8th grade civics textbook.
[Unknown]: Think about it as three friends revising before a test and we go back to school.
[Unknown]: There's nostalgia.
[Unknown]: There's trauma.
[Unknown]: There are lunch breaks.
[Unknown]: There are favorite teachers.
[Unknown]: There are horrible teachers.
[Unknown]: There's everything.
[Unknown]: So every Tuesday, we bring in a guest on the podcast and we ask them a very simple question.
[Unknown]: Do you know how to citizen?
[Unknown]: Meghna, I think the question is, do you know how to citizen?
[Unknown]: But Shreyas, I'm asking you this question, do you know how to citizen?
[Unknown]: Hi listeners, we at Aditya Birla Sun Life Mutual Fund have come up with a special podcast
[Unknown]: series called MF101 in collaboration with Bloomberg Quint.
[Unknown]: MF101 is an informative series that will help you understand the recipe behind mutual fund
[Unknown]: investments.
[Unknown]: And what's more, it's coming from the chefs of the mutual fund buffet table from the very
[Unknown]: own fund managers and analysts who are the manufacturers of the funds that help you realize
[Unknown]: your investment goals.
[Unknown]: New episodes out every Monday.
[Unknown]: You can listen to the show on the IBM podcast app or wherever you get your podcasts.